.. _input-output:

================
Input and output
================

.. _io_files:

Input files
-----------

.. _io_cq_in:

Conquest_input
++++++++++++++
All input parameters are specified in the ``Conquest_input`` file,
including the names of the coordinate file and the ion files.  This
file controls the run; there are many sensible default values for
input parameters, but you should ensure that you understand what
they mean.

The most common input tags are listed briefly here.
Full documentation can be found in :ref:`input_tags`.

* ``AtomMove.TypeOfRun`` takes ``static``, ``md``, ``lbfgs``, ``cg``
* ``IO.Coordinates`` File name
* ``DM.SolutionMethod`` diagon

  * ``Diag.MPMesh``   T/F
  * ``Diag.MPMeshX`` (and ``Y`` and ``Z``) N
  * ``Diag.GammaCentred`` T/F
* ``General.NumberOfSpecies`` N
* ``%block ChemicalSpeciesLabel`` Specifies element number, mass and
  ion file name
* ``General.LoadDM`` T/F (to reload the density matrix)
* ``IO.FractionalAtomicCoords`` T/F
* ``Spin.SpinPolarised`` T/F
  
  * ``Spin.FixSpin`` T/F
  * ``Spin.Magn`` Difference between spin channel occupations
* ``Grid.GridCutoff`` Energy in Ha
* ``minE.SCTolerance`` Fractional tolerance
* ``AtomMove.NumSteps`` N
* ``AtomMove.MaxForceTol`` in Ha/bohr
* ``AtomMove.OptCell`` T/F
* ``SC.KerkerPreCondition`` T/F (for Kerker preconditioning of SCF)
* ``SC.MaxIters`` N (maximum number of SCF iterations
  
Go to :ref:`top <input-output>`

.. _io_ion:

Ion files
+++++++++

The ion files contain data on the different species being modelled:
valence charge, pseudopotentials, pseudo-atomic orbitals (PAOs) etc.  Full
details on how the PAOs are used as basis functions for CONQUEST can
be found in the manual section on :ref:`basis sets <basissets>`.  A
utility for generating these files is provided with CONQUEST, but Siesta ion
files can also be read.  The CONQUEST utility uses the
pseudopotentials generated by the `ONCVPSP`_ code (though note that to
generate new files for CONQUEST, you will need a small patch).

A set of input files for all elements in the `PseudoDojo`_ library for
both LDA and PBE exchange-correlation functionals is provided in the
directory ``pseudo-and-pao``.  This will allow you to generate ion
files for these elements easily.

The utility for generating ion files is called `MakeIonFiles`, and its
source code is found in the ``tools/BasisGeneration`` directory.  It
uses the same ``system.make`` file as CONQUEST, and following
compilation the executable will be moved to the ``bin`` directory.
The key parameters to be set in the ``Conquest_input`` file for the
ion file generation are:

* ``General.NumberOfSpecies`` to specify number of species
* ``%block SpeciesLabels`` to specify what the species are
* In the species block (set with ``%block XX`` for species XX):
  
  * ``Atom.PseudopotentialFile`` to specify the input file for the ONCVPSP code
  * ``Atom.VKBFile`` to specify the file that CONQUEST needs to read
    (included in the library of inputs)
  * ``Atom.BasisSize`` to specify the size of the basis; at present
    this can take the values: ``minimal``; ``small``; ``medium``; and
    ``large``.

Further fine-grained control can be applied to the basis functions;
this will be documented after the pre-release of CONQUEST.

.. _ONCVPSP: http://http://www.mat-simresearch.com
.. _PseudoDojo: https://www.pseudo-dojo.org/

Go to :ref:`top <input-output>`

.. _io_coords:
  
Coordinates
+++++++++++

The coordinates are specified in a separate file with relatively
simple format.  The coordinates can be specified in fractional form
(default) or cartesian (set the input tag ``IO.FractionalAtomicCoords T``).
Distance units can be Bohr radii (default) or Angstroms (set the input tag
``General.DistanceUnits`` to ``Ang``).  At present,
CONQUEST only handles *orthorhombic* unit cells.

The coordinate file is formatted as follows:

::
   
   a   0.0 0.0
   0.0 b   0.0
   0.0 0.0 c
   NAtoms
   x y z species MoveX MoveY MoveZ
   .
   .
   .

Note that the flags ``MoveX`` etc take values T/F and indicate whether
atoms are free to move in x, y and z, respectively.  The flag
``species`` is an integer, and selects based on species defined in the
:ref:`atomic specification <input_atomic_spec>` section of the
``Conquest_input`` file. 

Go to :ref:`top <input-output>`

.. _io_output:

Output files
------------

.. _io_output_main:

Main output
+++++++++++

By default, CONQUEST writes output to the ``Conquest_out`` file
(though the filename can be set with the parameter ``IO.OutputFile``,
and the flag ``IO.WriteOutToFile`` (T/F) selects output to file
or ``stdout``).  This file contains all details of the calculation,
including energies, forces and information on the different stages of
the calculation.  The output verbosity is controlled by the
``IO.Iprint`` family of parameters, which allows different levels of
output detail to be set for different areas of the code.

Note that, during the pre-release period of CONQUEST, we will be
tidying the output and making it more consistent.

Go to :ref:`top <input-output>`

.. _io_output_elec:

Electronic structure
++++++++++++++++++++

Different electronic structure outputs are available; in each case,
the key output flag is given.  Further output flags are described in :ref:`input_tags`.

  * Charge density
  * Band-resolved charge density (``IO.outputWF``)
  * Density of states (``IO.writeDOS``)
  * Atom-projected density of states (``IO.write_proj_DOS``)
  * Atomic charges, using the Becke approach (``IO.AtomChargeOutput``)

The Kohn-Sham eigenvalues are output in the ``Conquest_out`` file.
The charge densities need post-processing to convert from the
standard output format to a file compatible with visualisation
(current supported formats include Gaussian CUBE file and OpenDX
files).

Go to :ref:`top <input-output>`

.. _io_output_atoms:

Atomic structure
++++++++++++++++

During structural relaxation and molecular dynamics, the atomic
structure at the end of each step is saved in the output file
``coord_next.dat``.  This is in the same format as the input.

Go to :ref:`top <input-output>`

.. _io_md:

Molecular dynamics
++++++++++++++++++

A molecular dynamics run will generate a number of additional plain text output
files:

  * ``md.stats`` --- summarises thermodynamic quantities at each steps
  * ``md.frames`` --- contains the complete physical state of the system (lattice
    parameters, atomic positions, velocities, forces, stress).
  * ``md.checkpoint`` --- data required for MD restart, namely atomic velocities
    and extended system variables.
  * ``md.positions`` --- Atomic coordinates saved at the moment of checkpointing
  * ``trajectory.xsf`` --- atomic coordinates save in .xsf format, which can be
    visualised using (for example) VMD, if ``AtomMove.WriteXSF`` is true..

Full details are available in :ref:`moldyn`.

Go to :ref:`top <input-output>`
